Believe me, lords, forflying at the brook,
I saw not better sportthese seven years' day:
But what a point, my lord,your falcon made,
And what a pitch she flewabove the rest!
To see how God in all hiscreatures works!
Yea, man and birds arefain of climbing high.
No marvel, an it like yourmajesty,
My lord protector's hawksdo tower so well;
They know their masterloves to be aloft,
And bears his thoughtsabove his falcon's pitch.
My lord, 'tis but a baseignoble mind
That mounts no higher thana bird can soar.
I thought as much; hewould be above the clouds.
Ay, my lord cardinal? howthink you by that?
Were it not good yourgrace could fly to heaven?
The treasury ofeverlasting joy.
Thy heaven is on earth;thine eyes and thoughts
Beat on a crown, thetreasure of thy heart;
Pernicious protector,dangerous peer,
That smooth'st it so withking and commonweal!
Churchmen so hot? Gooduncle, can you do it?
To hide such malice withsuch holiness?
No malice, sir; no morethan well becomes
So good a quarrel and sobad a peer.
As who, my lord?
Why, as yourself, my lord,
An't like your lordlylord-protectorship.
Why, Suffolk, Englandknows thine insolence.
And thy ambition,Gloucester.
I prithee, peace, goodqueen,
And whet not on thesefurious peers;
For blessed are thepeacemakers on earth.
Let me be blessed for thepeace I make,
Against this proudprotector, with my sword!
Faith, holy uncle,
would 'twere come to that!
Marry, when thou darest.
Dare? Until thee priest,
plantagenets couldnever brook the dare.
I am plantagenet as well asthou.
And son to John of Gaunt.
In bastardy.
I scorn thy words.
Make up no factiousnumbers for the matter;
In thine own person answerthy abuse.
Ay, where thou darest not peep:
an if thou darest,
This evening, on theeast side of the grove.
How now, my lords!
Believe me, cousinGloucester,
Had not your man put upthe fowl so suddenly,
We had had more sport.
Come with thy two-handsword.
True, uncle.
Are ye well advised?
The east side of the grove?
I am with you.
Why, how now, uncleGloucester!
Talking of hawking;nothing else, my lord.
Now, by God's mother, priest,I'll shave your crown for this,
Protector, see to't well,protect thyself.
The winds grow high; so doyour stomachs, lords.
How irksome is this musicto my heart!
When such strings jar,what hope of harmony?
I pray, my lords, let mecompound this strife.
(commotion in background)
What noise is this?
Fellow, what miracle dostthou proclaim?
A miracle! a miracle!
Come to the king and tellhim what miracle.
Forsooth, a blind man atSaint Alban's shrine,
Within this half-hour,hath received his sight;
A man that ne'er saw inhis life before.
Now, God be praised, thatto believing souls
Gives light in darkness,comfort in despair!
(crowd chanting)
Here comes the townsmen onprocession,
To present your highnesswith the man.
Great is his comfort inthis earthly vale,
Although by his sight hissin be multiplied.
(men singing) A miracle! Amiracle!
Stand by, my masters:bring him near the king;
His highness' pleasure isto talk with him.
Good fellow, tell us herethe circumstance,
That we for thee mayglorify the Lord.
What, hast thou been longblind and now restored?
Born blind, an't pleaseyour grace.
Ay, indeed, was he.
What woman is this?
His wife, an't like yourworship.
Hadst thou been his mother,thou couldst have better told.
Where wert thou born?
At Berwick in the north,an't like your grace.
Poor soul, God's goodnesshath been great to thee:
Let never day nor nightunhallow'd pass,
But still remember whatthe Lord hath done.
Tell me, good fellow,camest thou here by chance,
Or of devotion, to thisholy shrine?
God knows, of puredevotion; being call'd
A hundred times andoftener, in my sleep,
By good Saint Alban; whosaid, 'Saunder, come,
Come, offer at my shrine,and I will help thee.'
Most true, forsooth; andmany time and oft
Myself have heard a voiceto call him so.
What, art thou lame?
Ay, God Almighty help me!
How camest thou so?
A fall off of a tree.
A plum-tree, master.
How long hast thou beenblind?
Born so, master.
What, and wouldst climb atree?
But that in all my life,when I was a youth.
Too true; and bought hisclimbing very dear.
Mass, thou lovedst plums well,that wouldst venture so.
Alas, good master, my wifedesired some damsons,
And made me climb, withdanger of my life.
A subtle knave! but yet itshall not serve.
Let me see thine eyes:wink now: now open them:
In my opinion yet thouseest not well.
Yes, master, clear as day, Ithank God and Saint Alban.
Say'st thou me so? Whatcolour is this cloak of?
Red, master; red as blood.
Why, that's well said.What colour is this gown of?
Black, forsooth:coal-black as jet.
Why, then, thou know'stwhat colour jet is of?
And yet, I think, jet didhe never see.
But cloaks and gowns,before this day, a many.
Never, before this day, inall his life.
Tell me, sirrah, what's myname?
Alas, master, I know not.
What's his name?
I know not.
Nor his?
No, indeed, master.
What's thine own name?
Saunder Simpcox, an if itplease you, master.
Then, Saunder, sit there, thelyingest knave in Christendom.
If thou hadst been born blind,
thou mightest as well haveknown all our names as thus to
name the severalcolours we do wear.
Sight may distinguishof colours,
but suddenly to nominatethem all, it is impossible.
Saint Alban here hathdone a miracle;
and might ye not thinkhis cunning to be great,
that could restore thiscripple to his legs?
O master, that you could!
My masters of Saint Alban's,
have you not a beadle in yourtown, and things called whips?
Yes, my lord.
Send for onepresently.
Sirrah, go fetch thebeadle hither straight.
Now fetch me a stool hitherby and by. Now, sirrah,
if you mean to saveyourself from whipping,
leap me over thisstool and run.
Alas, master, I am notable to stand alone:
You go about to torture mein vain.
Well we must haveyou find your legs.
Whip him till heleap over that same stool.
Come on, sirrah; off withyour doublet quickly.
Alas, master, what shall Ido? I am not able to stand.
(Man screams. Crowd chants) Amiracle!!
O God, seest Thou this,and bearest so long?
It made me laugh to seethe villain run.
Follow the knave; and takethis drab away.
Alas, sir, we did it forpure need.
Let them be whipped throughevery market-town,
till they come to Berwick,from whence they came.
Duke Humphrey has done amiracle to-day.
True; made the lame toleap and fly away.
But you have done moremiracles than I;
You made in a day, mylord, whole towns to fly.
What tidings with ourcousin Buckingham?
Such as my heart dothtremble to unfold.
A sort of naughty persons,lewdly bent,
Under the countenance andconfederacy of Lady Eleanor,
the protector's wife,
The ringleader and head ofall this rout,
Have practised dangerouslyagainst your state,
Dealing with witches andwith conjurers:
Whom we have apprehendedin the fact;
Raising up wicked spiritsfrom under ground,
Demanding of King Henry'slife and death,
And other of yourhighness' privy-council;
As more at large yourgrace shall understand.
O God, what mischiefs workthe wicked ones,
Heaping confusion on theirown heads thereby!
Gloucester, see here thetainture of thy nest.
And look thyself befaultless, thou wert best.
Madam, for myself, toheaven I do appeal,
How I have loved my kingand commonweal:
And, for my wife, I knownot how it stands;
Sorry I am to hear what Ihave heard:
Noble she is, but if shehave forgot
Honour and virtue andconversed with such
As, like to pitch, defilenobility,
I banish her my bed andcompany
And give her as a prey tolaw and shame,
That hath dishonour'dGloucester's honest name.
Well, for this night wewill repose us here:
To-morrow toward Londonback again,
To look into this businessthoroughly
And call these fouloffenders to their answers
And poise the cause injustice' equal scales,
Whose beam stands sure, whoserightful cause prevails.
Now, my good Lords ofSalisbury and Warwick,
Our simple supper ended,give me leave
In this close walk tosatisfy myself,
In craving your opinion ofmy title,
Which is infallible, toEngland's crown.
My lord, I long to hear itat full.
Sweet York, begin: and ifthy claim be good,
The Nevils are thysubjects to command.
Then thus:
Edward the Third, mylords, had seven sons:
The first, the Black Princedied before his father
and left behind him,Richard, his only son.
Who after Edward the Third'sdeath reign'd as king;
Till Henry Bolingbroke, The sonand heir of John of Gaunt,
the fourth of Edward's sons
Seized on the realm,deposed the rightful king,
Sent his poor queen toFrance, from whence she came,
And him to Pomfret; where,as all you know,
Harmless Richard wasmurder'd traitorously.
Father, the duke of York hathtold the truth:
Thus got the house ofLancaster the crown.
Which now they hold byforce and not by right;
For Richard, the firstson's heir, being dead,
The issue of the next sonshould have reign'd.
But William of Hatfielddied without an heir.
The third son, Duke ofClarence, from whose line
I claimed the crown, hadissue, Philippe, a daughter,
Who married EdmundMortimer, Earl of March:
Edmund had issue, RogerEarl of March;
Roger had issue, Edmund,Anne and Eleanor.
This Edmund, in the reignof Bolingbroke,
As I have read, laid claimunto the crown;
And therefore was kept captivetil he died
But to the rest.
His eldest sister, Anne,
My mother, being heir untothe crown
Married RichardEarl of Cambridge;
who was son to Edmund Langley,Edward the Third's fifth son.
By her I claim the kingdom:
she was heir To Roger Earlof March, who was the son
Of Edmund Mortimer, whomarried Philippe,
Sole daughter unto LionelDuke of Clarence:
So, if the issue of the elderson succeed before the younger,
I am king.
What plain proceeding ismore plain than this?
Henry doth claim the crownfrom John of Gaunt,
The fourth son; Yorkclaims it from the third.
Till Lionel's issue fails,his should not reign:
It fails not yet, butflourishes in thee
And in thy sons, fairslips of such a stock.
Then, father Salisbury,kneel we together;
And in this private plotbe we the first
That shall salute ourrightful sovereign
With honour of hisbirthright to the crown.
Long live our sovereignRichard, England's king!
We thank you, lords. But Iam not your king
Till I be crown'd and thatmy sword be stain'd
With heart-blood of thehouse of Lancaster;
And that's not suddenly tobe perform'd,
But with advice and silentsecrecy.
Do you as I do in thesedangerous days:
Wink at the Duke ofSuffolk's insolence,
At Beaufort's pride, atSomerset's ambition,
At Buckingham and all thecrew of them,
Till they have snared theshepherd of the flock,
That virtuous prince, thegood Duke Humphrey:
'Tis that they seek, andthey in seeking that
Shall find their deaths,if York can prophesy.
My lord, break we off; weknow your mind at full.
My heart assures me thatthe Earl of Warwick
Shall one day make theDuke of York a king.
And, Nevil, this I doassure myself:
Richard shall live to makethe Earl of Warwick
The greatest man inEngland but the king.
Stand forth, Dame EleanorCobham, Gloucester's wife:
In sight of God and us,your guilt is great:
Receive the sentence ofthe law for sins
Such as by God's book areadjudged to death.
You four, from hence toprison back again;
From thence unto the placeof execution:
The witch in Smithfieldshall be burn'd to ashes,
And you three shall bestrangled on the gallows.
You, madam, for you aremore nobly born,
Despoiled of your honourin your life,
Shall, after three days'open penance done,
Live in your country herein banishment,
With Sir John Stanley, inthe Isle of Man.
Welcome is banishment;welcome were my death.
Eleanor, the law, thousee'st, hath judged thee:
I cannot justify whom thelaw condemns.
(old woman laughs)
I beseech your majesty,give me leave to go;
Sorrow would solace andmine age would ease.
Stay, Humphrey Duke ofGloucester: ere thou go,
Give up thy staff: Henry willto himself protector be;
and God shall be my hope,
My stay, my guide andlantern to my feet:
And go in peace, Humphrey,no less beloved
Than when thou wertprotector to thy King.
I see no reason why a kingof years
Should be to be protectedlike a child.
God and King Henry governEngland's realm.
Give up your staff, sir,and the king his realm.
My staff? here, nobleHenry, is my staff:
As willingly do I the sameresign
As e'er thy father Henrymade it mine;
And even as willingly atthy feet I leave it
As others wouldambitiously receive it.
Farewell, good king: whenI am dead and gone,
May honourable peaceattend thy throne!
Why, now is Henry king,and Margaret queen;
And Humphrey Duke ofGloucester scarce himself,
That bears so shrewd amaim; two pulls at once;
His lady banish'd, and alimb lopp'd off.
This staff of honourraught, there let it stand
Where it best fits to be,in Henry's hand.
Thus droops this loftypine and hangs his sprays;
Thus Eleanor's pride diesin her youngest days.
Lords, let him go. Pleaseit your majesty,
This is the day appointedfor the combat;
And ready are theappellant and defendant,
The armourer and his man,to enter the lists,
So please your highness tobehold the fight.
Ay, good my lord; forpurposely therefore
Left I the court, to seethis quarrel tried.
O God's name, see thelists and all things fit:
Here let them end it; andGod defend the right!
Here, neighbour Horner, I drinkto you in a cup of sack:
and fear not, neighbour,you shall do well enough.
And here, neighbour,here's a cup of charneco.
And here's a pot of gooddouble beer, neighbour:
drink, and fear not yourman.
Let it come, i' faith,and I'll pledge you all;
and a fig for Peter!
First 'Prentice Here,Peter, I drink to thee:
and be not afraid.
Second 'Prentice Be merry,Peter, and fear not thy master:
fight for credit ofthe 'prentices.
I thank you all: drink, andpray for me, I pray you;
for I think I have taken mylast draught in this world.
Here, Robin, an if I die,I give thee my apron:
and, Will, thou shalthave my hammer:
and here, Tom, take allthe money that I have.
O Lord bless me! I pray God!for I am never able to deal
with my master, he hath learntme so much fence already.
Come, leave your drinking,and fall to blows.
Sirrah, what's thy name?
Peter, forsooth.
Peter! what more?
Thump.
Thump! then see thou thumpthy master well.
Masters, I am comehither, as it were,
at my man's instigation,
to prove him a knave andmyself an honest man:
and touching the Duke of York,
I will take my death, Inever meant him any ill,
nor the king, nor thequeen: and therefore,
Peter, have at theewith a downright blow!
Dispatch: this knave'stongue begins to double.
Sound, trumpets, alarum tothe combatants!
(trumpets sound)
Hold, Peter, hold! Iconfess, I confess treason.
Take away his weapon.Fellow, thank God,
and the good wine inthy master's way.
O God, have I overcome mineenemy in this presence?
O Peter, thou hastprevailed in right!
Go, take hence thattraitor from our sight;
For by his death we doperceive his guilt:
And God in justice hathrevealed to us
The truth and innocence ofthis poor fellow,
Which he had thought tohave murder'd wrongfully.
Come, fellow, follow usfor thy reward.
Thus sometimes hath thebrightest day a cloud;
And after summer evermoresucceeds barren winter,
with his wrathful nipping cold:
So cares and joys abound,as seasons fleet.
Sirs, what's o'clock?
Ten, my lord.
Ten is the hour that wasappointed me
To watch the coming of mypunish'd duchess:
Uneath may she endure theflinty streets,
To tread them with hertender-feeling feet.
Soft! I think shecomes; and I'll prepare
My tear-stain'd eyes tosee her miseries.
So please your grace, we'lltake her from the sheriff.
No, stir not, for yourlives; let her pass by.
Come you, my lord, to seemy open shame?
Now thou dost penance too.Look how they gaze!
See how the giddymultitude do point,
And nod their heads, andthrow their eyes on thee!
Ah, Gloucester, hide theefrom their hateful looks,
And, in thy closet pentup, rue my shame,
And ban thine enemies,both mine and thine!
Be patient, gentle Nell;forget this grief.
Ah, Gloucester, teach meto forget myself!
Trow'st thou that e'erI'll look upon the world,
Or count them happy thatenjoy the sun?
No; dark shall be my lightand night my day;
To think upon my pompshall be my hell.
Sometime I'll say, I amDuke Humphrey's wife,
And he a prince and rulerof the land:
Yet so he ruled and such aprince he was
As he stood by whilst I,his forlorn duchess,
Was made a wonder and apointing-stock
To every idle rascalfollower.
But be thou mild and blushnot at my shame,
Nor stir at nothing tillthe axe of death
Hang over thee, as, sure,it shortly will;
For Suffolk, he that cando all in all
With her that hateth theeand hates us all,
And York and impiousBeaufort, that false priest,
Have all limed bushes tobetray thy wings,
And, fly thou how thoucanst, they'll tangle thee:
But fear not thou, untilthy foot be snared,
Nor never seek preventionof thy foes.
Ah, Nell, forbear! thouaimest all awry;
I must offend before I beattainted;
And had I twenty times somany foes,
And each of them hadtwenty times their power,
All these could notprocure me any scathe,
So long as I am loyal,true and crimeless.
Wouldst have me rescuethee from this reproach?
Why, yet thy scandal werenot wiped away
But I in danger for thebreach of law.
Thy greatest help isquiet, gentle Nell:
I pray thee, sort thyheart to patience;
These few days' wonderwill be quickly worn.
I summon your grace to hismajesty's parliament,
Holden at Bury the firstof this next month.
And my consent ne'er ask'dherein before!
This is close dealing.Well, I will be there.
My Nell, I take my leave:and, master sheriff,
Let not her penance exceedthe king's commission.
An't please your grace,here my commission stays,
And Sir John Stanley isappointed now
To take her with him tothe Isle of Man.
Must you, Sir John,protect my lady here?
So am I given in charge,may't please your grace.
Entreat her not the worse inthat I pray you use her well:
the world may laugh again;
And I may live to do youkindness if you do it her:
and so, Sir John, farewell!
What, gone, my lord, andbid me not farewell!
Witness my tears, I cannotstay to speak.
Art thou gone too? allcomfort go with thee!
For none abides with me:my joy is death;
Death, at whose name I ofthave been afear'd,
Because I wish'd thisworld's eternity.
Stanley, I prithee, go,and take me hence;
I care not whither, for Ibeg no favour,
Only convey me where thouart commanded.
Sheriff, farewell, andbetter than I fare,
Although thou hast beenconduct of my shame.
It is my office; and,madam, pardon me.
Ay, ay, farewell; thyoffice is discharged.
Come, Stanley, shall wego?
Madam, your penance done,throw off this sheet,
And go we to attire youfor our journey.
My shame will not beshifted with my sheet:
No, it will hang upon myrichest robes
And show itself, attire mehow I can.
Go, lead the way; I longto see my prison.